ADR009: Non-Interactive Default Rules for Reduced Padding (#1003)
celestiaorg/celestia-app: docs/architecture/adr-009-proof-size-analysis.md

# ADR 009: New Non-Interactive Default Rules for Reduced Padding

## Changelog

- 14.11.2022: Initial Draft

## Context

>  Is it worth it to change non-interactive default rules as a follup up of ADR 008 [Link??????] to decrease the padding? The downside is that the message inclusion proof size will not be as efficient in big square sizes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 Is it worth it to change non-interactive default rules as a follup up of [ADR 008](./adr-008-square-size-independent-message-commitments.md) to decrease the padding? The downside is that the message inclusion proof size will not be as efficient in big square sizes.
```

# ADR 009: New Non-Interactive Default Rules for Reduced Padding

## Changelog

- 14.11.2022: Initial Draft

> ## Context
> 
>  Is it worth it to change non-interactive default rules as a follow-up of [ADR 008](./adr-008-square-size-independent-message-commitments.md)  to decrease the padding? The downside is that the message inclusion proof size will not be as efficient in big square sizes.
> 
>  **Note: This analysis implies the implementation of #1004. If the tree over the subtree roots is not a Namespace Merkle Tree then the analysis of both methods has the same proof size.**
> 
> - Inter-message padding can be reduced if we can change the non-interactive default rules from this:
> 
>     > - Messages that span multiple rows must begin at the start of a row (this can occur if a message is longer than k shares or if the block producer decides to start a message partway through a row and it cannot fit).
>     > - Messages begin at a location aligned with the largest power of 2 that is not larger than the message length or k.
> 
>     To this: **Messages start at an index that is a multiple of its `msgMinSquareSize`.**
> 
>     As an example, we have this diagram. Message 1 is three shares long and is followed by message 2, which is 11 shares long, so the `msgMinSquareSize` of the second message is equal to four. Therefore we have a padding of 5 shares shown in light blue. Furthermore, with the new non-interactive default rule set, a message of size 11 can start in this block at index zero and index three because they are multiples of four. Therefore, we save four shares of padding while retaining the same commitment.
> 
>     ![Padding Savings](./assets/padding-savings.png)  

Reviewer: [optional] I noticed a few small styling things in this section and rather than suggesting changes on individual lines, I suggested a revised section. The suggestions are based on:
- reduce one layer of indentation
- visually format the current and proposed non-interactive default rules so that they are easier to compare
- link to issue #1004 
- describe upside and downside in the same paragraph
- reword the padding savings explanation and separate the current vs proposed into distinct paragraphs

```suggestion
## Context

[ADR 008](./adr-008-square-size-independent-message-commitments.md) makes it possible for the current non-interactive default rules to be modified slightly:

Current

> - Messages that span multiple rows must begin at the start of a row (this can occur if a message is longer than k shares or if the block producer decides to start a message partway through a row and it cannot fit).
> - Messages begin at a location aligned with the largest power of 2 that is not larger than the message length or k.

Proposed

> - Messages start at an index that is a multiple of its `msgMinSquareSize`.

The upside of this proposal is that it reduces the inter-message padding. The downside is that a message inclusion proof will not be as efficient for large square sizes so the proof will be larger.

> **Note**
> This analysis assumes the implementation of [celestia-app#1004](https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-app/issues/1004). If the tree over the subtree roots is not a Namespace Merkle Tree then both methods have the same proof size.**

As an example, take the diagram below. Message 1 is 3 shares long and message 2 is 11 shares long.

With the current non-interactive default rules, message 2 must start at a location aligned with the largest power of 2 that is not larger than 11 (message length) or 8 (square size). Therefore, message 2 must start at a location aligned with 8 which is index 16 in the example below. This arragenemnt results in 5 shares of padding.

With the proposed non-interactive default rules, message 2 must start at an index that is a multiple of `msgMinSquareSize`. A message of 11 shares can fit in a square size of 4 (since 4 * 4 = 16 available shares which is < 11) so `msgMinSquareSize` is 4. Therefore, message 2 can start at index 12. This arrangement results in 1 share of padding.

![Padding Savings](./assets/padding-savings.png)
```

### Defining variables for this Analysis

- n:= Message length in number of shares
- k:= Square size
- r:= Number of rows a message fills in a Celestia square.

### The following Questions will be answered

> - Why has a message in a bigger square size even with square size independent commitments O(log(n)) proof size?

Reviewer: [question] can this be rephrased to something like

```suggestion
- Given square size independent commitments, why does a message in a larger square size result in a O(log(n)) message inclusion proof size?
```

Note: accepting this suggestion implies updating the heading below

> - What is the worst-case constructible message in a square to have the biggest impact from switching from O(log(n)) to O(sqrt(n))?

Reviewer: [optional] rephrased for easier readability 

```suggestion
- Assuming message inclusion proof sizes change from O(log(n)) to O(sqrt(n)), what is the worst-case constructible message?
```

Note: accepting this suggestion implies updating the heading below

- Why can we not use the same trick that we used in Question 1 in a single row for more efficient proofs over the row roots?
- How big is the proof size for this message?
- What is the worst constructible block with the most amount of padding with old and new non-interactive defaults?

> - Quantify padding and proof size cost.

Reviewer: [optional] Since the rest of these list items are questions and the heading is question, proposal to rephrase to a question

```suggestion
- What is the quantified padding and proof size cost?
```

## 1. Why has a message in a bigger square size even with square size independent commitments O(log(n)) proof size?

If you use the old NI-Rules then the message begins at a location aligned with the largest power of 2 that is not larger than the message length or k. Because the subtree roots are aligned you can skip some subtree roots and calculate their parents.
In the example below instead of proving H1, H2, H3, and H4 to the DataRoot you can prove H10. **H10 is part of the commitment generation and part of the Merkle tree to the DataRoot.** That is why you can use it for more efficient proofs. In smaller square sizes, you cannot do this, because H10 does not exist. The nodes in **red** are the subtree nodes that you need to provide for the message inclusion proof. The nodes in **blue** are the additional nodes for the Merkle proof.

![Efficient Merkle Proofs with ADR008](./assets/effizicient-proof-size-ADR008.png)

> So why can you not do it with the new NI-Rules? This is because H10 is not generated. In the diagram below the first 8 shares are in the row before and therefore the tree structure changes. The previous subtree root H10 is now H23 and cannot be used for the efficiency boost.

Reviewer: [optional] I realize this document uses NI-Rules in many places so it may not be desirable to use the longer form "non-interactive default rules". However, the longer form avoids any ambiguity around abbreviations which we've historically had with NID (sometimes confused with namespaceID). If we want to keep the abbreviation, we may clarify its first usage (I think this instance) by including the longer form in parenthesis after: NI-Rules (non-interactive rules)

```suggestion
So why can you not do it with the new non-interactive default rules? This is because H10 is not generated. In the diagram below the first 8 shares are in the row before and therefore the tree structure changes. The previous subtree root H10 is now H23 and cannot be used for the efficiency boost.
```

Author: I will switch to the longer form. Maybe it's hinders readability to add new abbreviations. I did not want to use NID, because of the misunderstanding you mentioned.

H12 is part of the commitment generation and part of the Merkle tree to the DataRoot.
It is only generated in the bigger square and not in the smaller square because in the smaller square you have to take into account the nodes over the parity shares.
As H12 only exists in the bigger square the more efficient proofs only work in those squares.

![Row root might not be subtree root.](./assets/rowroots-might-not-be-subtreeroot.png)

## 4. How big is the proof size for this message?

We differentiate the size of the proof between the Old NI-Rules and the new NI-Rules.

### Old Non-Interactive Default Rules

Each row consists of one subtree root, which means if you have log(n) rows you will have in total log(n) subtree roots. The last row has log(n) subtree roots. The last row will also need log(k) blue nodes. Blue nodes are additional nodes that you need for the Merkle proof, which have been used in the previous diagrams. After having now r row roots we need to a Merkle proof of them to the `DataRoot`.In the worst case, the message lies in the middle of the block. Therefore we will need 2* log(k) blue nodes for the proof.

> Proofsize = log(n) + log(n) + log(k) + 2*log(k)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Proof size = log(n) + log(n) + log(k) + 2*log(k)
```

### New Non-Interactive Default Rules

Each row consists of O(sqrt(n)/log(n)) subtree roots. Which makes in total sqrt(n) subtree roots. The rest is here the same as before.

> Proofsize = sqrt(n) + log(n) + log(k) + 2*log(k)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Proof size = sqrt(n) + log(n) + log(k) + 2*log(k)
```

## 5. What is the worst constructible block with the most amount of padding with old and new non-interactive default rules?

> For the old NI-Rules, when you have a square size of k you can alternate messages of size k/2 +1 and k/4 +1 to have the most amount of padding. This forces you to always use a new row.
> Padding = (k/2 -1) \* (k/2 -1) + (3k/4 -1) \* (k/2 -1)

Reviewer: [optional] to visually separate the equation from the text above

```suggestion
For the old NI-Rules, when you have a square size of k you can alternate messages of size k/2 +1 and k/4 +1 to have the most amount of padding. This forces you to always use a new row.

Padding = (k/2 -1) \* (k/2 -1) + (3k/4 -1) \* (k/2 -1)
```

> To have the most amount of padding for the new NI-Rules you use repeated messages of size 5 which will result in a padding of 3 in between.
> Padding = 3 \* (k-1) \* k/8

Reviewer: [optional]

```suggestion
To have the most amount of padding for the new NI-Rules you use repeated messages of size 5 which will result in a padding of 3 in between.

Padding = 3 \* (k-1) \* k/8
```

![Worst Case Padding](./assets/worst-case-padding.png)

## Result

Proofsize increases from 3024 bytes to 10704 bytes in 2 GB blocks. In the current `MaxSquareSize` it's from 2064 to 3312 bytes. For bigger messages, the number of row roots will approach sqrt(n). Before that, we will get to k/4 roots which will make the message act the same before and after the new NI-Rules.

![Proof Size Result](./assets/proof-size-result.png)

The worst-case padding decreases from 1.3 GB to 0.8 GB in 2 GB Blocks. In the current `MaxSquareSize` it's from 5 MB to 3 MB. In general, the worst-case padding size approaches in old NI-Rules 66% and the new NI-Rules 37.5%. That is a reduction of almost 50%.

![Padding Size Result](./assets/padding-size-result.png)

## Status

Proposed

## Consequences

### Positive

> The Padding decreases a lot.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The padding decreases a lot.
```

### Negative

> The Proof size increases a bit.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The proof size increases a bit.
```
